Marshall 
Cameron Marshall
Dr. West 
English 4W, Lec 18 
November 8, 2021 
Exploring Persona Through Tyler the Creator
Tyler Okonma, or as he’s better known, Tyler the Creator, is one of the greatest Hip-Hop polymaths of all time. Albeit tainted with years of controversy and valid criticisms, Tyler’s career and art have served as pillars of support and inspiration for the Black youth of the world because he challenges stereotypical perceptions of blackness. Like Pharrell before him, and artists like Kevin Abstract and Isaiah Rashad after him, Tyler embodies a new chapter in Hip-Hop, outlined by Hip-Hop scholar, M.K. Asante, as ‘Post-Hip-Hop’. In his text, It’s Bigger Than Hip-Hop, Asante states that “post-hip-hop is not the death of rap, but rather the birth of a new movement propelled by a paradigm shift” (16). Tyler has spearheaded this new era of the genre, harboring on themes of identity and sexuality and drawing on influences—skate culture, mental instability, the kaleidiscope existence of queer, Black people—that aid in the expansion of the rap scene, while still holding true to its past. Throughout the entirety of his extensive career, Tyler the Creator has utilized extreme personae in order to defy conventional expectations of black men, not only within societal respects to queerness and emotional vulnerability, but also within the Hip-Hop community at large, through the distinctive sounds and varying performances of his various alter-egos. 
Wolf Haley, the evil alter ego of Tyler the Creator, is the primary protagonist in the WOLF story arc, which began in the self-titled album, WOLF. Although absent from Tyler’s first studio album, BASTARD, he is mentioned and heard from prominently throughout both, WOLF and GOBLIN. Wolf Haley challenges what it means to be a black rapper, as his sound ventures away from conventional “gangsta” rap, and takes heavy influence from heavy metal sounds. Tyler’s first hit came with the song “Yonkers,” in which he makes jabs at Jesus saying, “Jesus called, he said he's sick of the disses / I told him to quit bitching, this isn't a fucking hotline / For a fucking shrink, sheesh” (18-21). Since its inception, rap music has centered on motifs of religion, specifically Christianity. Wolf Haley's clear dismissal of a quintessential aspect of traditional rap within “Yonkers” serves to emphasize his uniqueness within the hip-hop community. Additionally, the brash tone of his voice and the industrial sounds provided by bass guitars and electric keyboards further challenge traditional perceptions of what a black rapper’s music should sound like. Whenever he appears on stage or in music videos, Wolf Haley is always seen wearing a green ski mask, brandished with an upside-down cross on it, as seen in the “IFHY/Jamba” music video, off of Tyler’s sophomore album, Wolf. On the track itself, Wolf appears and delivers the bar, “You tumble crush on Hodgy's sluts, give money up then nutty, but / Professor nutty buddy clumpkin's petty when you touch his lunch / Like "what the fuck? I'm drunk as fuck, " turn the fucking music up / So I can hear these stupid fucks, talk no walk, like you discussed” (18-21). In centering the idiosyncrasies of stereotypical representations of what affluent black people, especially rappers, choose to do with their money, Haley strays from conventional expectations of black rappers by emphasizing the importance of individualism and going against what’s societally expected of one’s self. 
Shifting away from Tyler’s trademark raunchy and eccentric style, Flower Boy T is an eclectic man, who presents himself as timid, somber, and compassionate. Phonetically, Flower Boy has a distinctive soft sound, reminiscent of  a rap version of Luther Vandross. While Tyler’s trademark style centers on neon prints, hoodies and cut-off shorts, Flower Boy T opts for pastel prints, wool sweater vests and fitted trousers. Flower Boy T first appeared in Tyler’s fourth studio album, Scum Fuck Flower Boy, which featuers complex tracks, such as “Garden Shed,” that examine Flower Boy’s psyche. On the track, Flower Boy says,  “For the garden / That is where I was hidin' / That is what love I was I in / Ain't no reason to pretend” (24-27); and continues, saying, “Truth is, since a youth kid, thought it was a phase / Thought it'd be like the Frank; poof, gone / But, it's still goin' on” (30-32). Within this track, Flower Boy details the metaphorical “coming out” that’s intrinsic to the queer experience, and his struggles with accepting his sexuality. In his discussion of queerness, which is heralded as a taboo subject in the broader Black community, Flower Boy decostructs stereotypical narratives of queer expression as they pertain to black youth, in order to convey to them that their feelings and experiences aren’t products of moral corruption, but are rather natural. Later on in the album, Flower Boy makes another appearance on the track “911/Mr.Lonely” and totes the line, “They say the loudest in the room is weak / That's what they assume, but I disagree / I say the loudest in the room / Is prolly the loneliest one in the room (that's me)” (36-39). Flower Boy’s intense display of emotional vulnerability within this track breaks down the hypermasculine expectations of Black men by showing clear mental turmoil. In doing so, Flower Boy reconstructs conventional perceptions of Black men and humanizes them, by conveying the importance of prioritizing mental health. Flower Boy deconstructs stereotypical narratives of Black men, especially as they relate to emotional vulnerability and queer expression. 
Although Tyler’s career and bodies of work have recently garnered massive success and acclaim, there exists a large portion of critics who deem his music hollow and his alter-ego’s as persona employed merely for chock factor and marketability. Daniel Levin Becker, a graduate of Yale University and music critic for SF Weekly, described Tyler’s multiple alter egos as, “the messy schizoid splatter painting of the child we’ve raised and ruined, and it’s coherent only as a hopeless plea for us to expect nothing from him again,” and Goblin as “terrible, even judged by idiot-savant shock value” (2). Within the article, Becker continues to ramble on about how Tyler only employs these personas for marketability purposes. However, in a WSJ interview from 2019, Tyler confronts his former trolly persona and explains how he really feels about his controversial debut album, Goblin. In short, he thinks Goblin is “trash.” Elsewhere in the illuminating profile, Tyler advocates for “niggas in the hood” who “wanna do ballet,” and calls out overzealous fans, telling them to “stop being fucking weird,” and stop associating him with Ace the Creator. Additionally, Tyler’s newer personaes, such as Flower Boy T and Igor, have historically unmarketable characteristics in rap music, such as flamboyance and sensitivity. In his essay, Metal Faces, Rap Masks: Identity and Resistance in Hip Hop's Persona Artist, Mickey Hess states, “another hidden transcript of resistance through the identity play of persona may allow rap performers to challenge the dichotomy of authentic vs. marketable music” (300).  Through the use of persona, Tyler crafts authentic music that relays the importance of individuality and comfortability in one’s self. Tyler’s musical endeavors disassociate him from the greater rap community, because instead of focusing on marketability and profit, he opts to center complex topics that make his audience feel seen.  
Igor is arguably Tyler’s most distinguishable alter-ego. Igor’s trademark style consists of bright, monochromatic suits, white Doc Marten 1461s, and a blonde wig. Igor’s sound also varies heavily from Tyler’s, being noticeably high-pitched and somber, as Igor’s character focuses primarily on dissociative identity in the face of young love, and the subsequent heartbreak that follows the loss of that love. Igor presents as very flamboyant, and takes obvious inspiration from sexually ambiguous icons who came before him, such as Prince. “EARFQUAKE,” the lead single off of Tyler’s fifth studio album Igor, opens with the lines, “'Cause you make my earth quake / Oh, you make my earth quake / Riding around, your love is shakin' me up and it's making my heart break / Cause you make my earth quake (earth quake, ooh)” (6-9). Igor explores the tumultuous nature of young love, and examines how that frantic and inconsistent love is heightened by queerness. Igor gives voice to generations of black, queer youth who have been societally conditioned to view themselves as undesirable and unworthy of love by showcasing that their emotions and expressions of love are completely natural. Continuously, on of the album’s most popular tracks, “NEW MAGIC WAND,” Igor states, “I need to get her out the picture / She's really fuckin' up my frame / She's not developed like we are” (4-6). On this track specifically, Igor displays his own emotion instability in the face of unrecipracted love, a common theme amongst queer youth. In his portrayal of intense sadness, Igor ventures away from the traditional black rapper by relaying feelings antithetical to the hypermasculine ones that are commonly associated with black, male rap artists. In doing so, Igor highlights the legitimacy of queer expression amongst black youth, while simoltaneously advocating for healthy displays of emotion amongst black youth. 
Although his extensive career has been riddled with controversy, Tyler the Creator has been a pivotal role model in the lives of countless black youth, especially those who associate with queerness, all across the globe. Personally, Tyler’s music has been vital in my own development as a black, queer person. Hearing Scum Fuck Flower Boy for the first time as a freshman in highschool was honeslty lifechanging. Being able to see and hear Flower Boy, a black man, express his trials and tribulations with queerness in such a beautiful and complex manner made me feel seen. As I reflect on the album now, I can still feel that same comfort. Tyler’s music is undoubtedly timeless, and his extensive use of persona throughout his career has defied conventional expectations of black men, not only within societal respects to queerness and emotional vulnerability, but also within the Hip-Hop community at large, through the distinctive sounds and varying performances of his various alter-egos. 






















Works Cited
Asante, M.K., Jr. It’s Bigger Than Hip-Hop: The Rise of the Post-Hip-Hop Generation. St. Martin’s Press, 2008. 
“Flower Boy by Tyler, the Creator.” Genius, https://genius.com/albums/Tyler-the-creator/Flower-boy. 
“Wolf by Tyler, the Creator.” Genius, https://genius.com/albums/Tyler-the-creator/Wolf. 
“Igor by Tyler, the Creator.” Genius, https://genius.com/albums/Tyler-the-creator/Igor. 
Hess, Mickey Metal Faces, Rap Masks: Identity and Resistance in Hip Hop's Persona Artist         Popular Music and Society; Jul 2005; 28, 3; Music Periodicals Database