Marshall 
Cameron Marshall
Dr. Bob Myers
Cluster 20CW
Jun 15, 2022
The Phenomenology of Rebellion: Final Paper
The human mind finds solace in familiarity and tradition. Our psyches retreat to sheltered thought in order to avoid inner-conflict and unfavorable events. Naturally, individuals seek to replicate this comfort in all aspects of their lives. People establish relationships, political and spiritual ideologies, and even base their residence and livelihoods off the stability that comes with an isolated philosophy. Challenging one’s personal beliefs is an extremely arduous task that requires us to question and reject notions that we afford great significance too. Internal reflection forces us to relinquish the comfortability we so often seek in consistency. Ralph Waldo Emerson speaks to the effects consistency has on the soul in an “Essay on Self-Reliance,” relaying, 
 “With consistency a great soul has simply nothing to do. He may as well concern himself with his shadow on the wall. Speak what you think now in hard words, and to-morrow speak what to-morrow thinks in hard words again, though it contradict everything you said to-day.--'Ah, so you shall be sure to be misunderstood.'--Is it so bad, then, to be misunderstood?”[1]
Emerson concludes that consistency brings decay to the human soul. If humans refuse to open themselves up to personal conflict by challenging their own thoughts, then there is no joy or advancement to be found in their lives. Derived from Hegel’s dialectic thinking comes the informal Hegel’s Game. Hegel’s Game involves throwing our notions about the world out into the world, in order to understand if our notions are correct and see how they perform in the real world. McCumber offers a perfect example of “Hagel’s Game,” in which he proposes, 
 “We have to get our hands dirty. We have to will the law. When we do that, we inevitably learn a great deal. Maybe the law is not so easy to enforce; maybe the sentences it proposes are too strict; maybe it is too vague. Then we have to move back and reformulate the law, then try again to carry it out as reformulated, that is as improved and enriched by our experience in trying to realize the earlier version. So we get a first moment of subjectivity and abstractness, a second moment of struggle, and a third moment of reformulation before trying again”[2]
McCumber’s example of “Hegel’s Game” displays the necessity to oppose complacency. If we are unwilling to open up to criticism, then how can we expect our philosophy to grow? McCumber reveals through this example that if human’s refuse to test their notions in the world, then their consciousness becomes trapped in an echo-chamber. Echo-chambers are self-manufactured environments in which singular frames of thought are reinforced by exclusive, repetitive exposure to that same belief. Echo-chambers are the mind’s prisons, and impede exposure to contradicting doctrines. Freedom implies the existence of institutional subjugation because in order to acquire freedom there must be something to be free from. Defined by German philosopher Martin Heidegger, freedom is, “the release from the previous understanding of Being, where Being is merely treated as beings, to let the Being and the new sense of reality be.”[3] Heidegger surmises that freedom is the dynamic expansion of the self, and the ability to formulate opinions uninterrupted by outside forces. Self-realization and perpetual freedom are impossible in the echo-chamber of stagnant thought. The human being is unable to progress and reach their full potential if they refuse to become comfortable with error. Rebellion against the material conditions of the physical world is impossible if the human mind is complacent in its artificial world and unwilling to attack its ignorance. A person’s unwavering adherence to labels and categorizations imprisons their consciousness, and by extension their ability to become free. 
An individual’s assumption that their personal beliefs are unchangeable, or that they’ve ascended into an atemporal domain, is an erroneous claim that ignores the phenomena of history. In Time and Philosophy historian John McCumber offers a brief synopsis of Hegel’s novel, Phenomenology of Spirit, which follows a series of portrayals of the adventures of a “Geist,”[4] or Spirit.[5] Geist’s appearance transitions as the story goes on, and as the adventure unravels various historical events and practices begin to appear and disappear. Mccumber comes to the conclusion that the book moves from three distinct stages. McCumber goes on to relay that the movement between these unique stages is dialectical, which Hegel considers to define things in terms of their opposites.[6]  The first stage is “Consciousness”[7] which centers around consciousness being opposite to unconsciousness. The initial phase dives into Hegel’s thoughts about the “awareness of objects that are not themselves aware.”[8] Hegel explains that the object and awareness work to define each other, however, that notion brings the object’s existence into question. Consciousness is constantly searching for the ultimate truth, the concrete sensory object, presented to us by sensation. In Phenomenology of Spirit Hegel clarifies that, 
 “The knowledge or knowing which is at the start or is immediately our object cannot be anything else but immediate knowledge itself, a knowledge of the immediate or of what simply is.”[9]
Hegel conveys that if knowledge operates within a finite period in which it is relevant and objective, then the conceptualization of unchanging knowledge is absurd. Hegel’s description of initial exposure reveals that the mind’s immediate interaction with a concept or object is only that and nothing more. Hegel’s phenomenological philosophy suggests that the human’s introduction to both abstract concepts and tangible objects is unable to be constant. An individual’s reluctance to acknowledge the uncertainty of time and the progression of knowledge ultimately alienates them from self-realization. Rahel Jaeggi defines self-alienation in his novel, Alienation, as, 
 “[in a second sense] refers to a failure to apprehend not only that one leads one’s own life but also that one leads it oneself or that one is called on to live it oneself.”[10] 
Jaeggi’s definition of self-alienation aids to the assertion that stagnation is the death of freedom, and subsequently the death of life. If freedom relies on the mind’s liberation, then one does not truly live while residing inside an echo-chamber. The human’s resistance to disrupting their cherished notions and past beliefs imprisons their mind in a lifeless state. Further within Phenomenology, Hegel discusses history and how the past impacts knowledge stating,  “The Now, as it is pointed out to us, is Now that has been, and this is its truth; it has not the truth of being. Yet this much is true, that it has been.”[11] McCumber explains this thought explaining, 
“Consciousness, then, can neither talk about nor know what is, but only what has been. Knowledge is not only conditioned by the past, but is directed upon it. The future is unknown, while the present does not stay long enough to be even pointed at; all that we have is the ongoing past. This ongoing past is now to count as ultimate truth. But because it extends over several moments, it is a universal; and the Phenomenology moves beyond the premise of sense- certainty, which was that ultimate truth was to be formulated as a concrete individual.” [12]  
Hegel’s ideological opposition to concrete truths highlights the irresponsibility of clinging to historical notions as fact because the past is constantly changing. Unwillingness to bring the past forward for judgment is doing a disservice to the human potential. McCumber’s overarching conclusion is that, 
“In Hegel’s case, to claim that we cannot, ever, attain unchanging truth would be to establish at least one unchanging truth: that one. But Hegel has not shown that; he has shown only that consciousness, and the reader who identifies with it at any stage, cannot claim to attain such a truth… Hegel has thus shown, not that there is no such thing as unchanging truth, but that all the many quests for such truth that the Phenomenology has explored have ended in failure; and until philosophers come up with a radically new way of conceiving such truth, and the quest for it, they must accept that there is no domain of unchanging truth to which they can have access.”[13]
In exposing the historical failures in search for an unchanging truth, Hegel displays that because truths exist in time they can never truly be unchanging. All truths are subject to the passage of time and historical context, which makes them ever-changing in what they reveal. The absence of an unchanging truth bolsters the assumption that stagnant thought and an aversion to challenging one’s personal beliefs is reductionist to the human being by showcasing that no notion is wholly true. 
        Canadian philosopher Ian Hacking builds off Hegel’s dialectic thinking, and speaks to how the constructed identities humans cling imprison their minds. Nominalism defines
 “the theory that there are no universal essences in reality and that the mind can frame no single concept or image corresponding to any universal or general term.”[14] 
Hacking affirms that the distinctive classifications of people are a species of nominalism, and that traditional nominalism is static.[15] Hacking explains that his version of nominalism is dynamic because he is interested specifically in how names interact with the named.[16] Dynamic nominalism connects heavily with what comes into existence with historical dynamics of naming and that name’s use subsequently.[17] To Hacking, dynamic nominalism is a way of making up people. Hacking outlines that ten engines of discovery and application exist in the world. The first seven engines are dedicated to the discovery of a new kind of people from a quantitative and categorical perspective. The process of discovery through the first seven engines functions to establish the validity of this new classification of humans, distinguishing them biologically, genetically and socially from other people. Hacking’s eighth engine, “Normalise,”[18] works to normalize the new unique identity, oftentimes offering behavioral and pharmaceutical treatments.[19] Hacking uses the ninth engine, “Bureaucratise,”[20] to describe the application made by the institution to define who fits the criteria of the new human. Hacking describes the tenth engine proclaiming, 
  “Kinds of people who are medicalised, normalised, administered, increasingly try to take back control from the experts and institutions, sometimes by creating new experts, new institutions. The famous case is homosexuality, so highly medicalised from the time of Krafft-Ebing late in the 19th century. That was the very period in which legal institutions became active in punishing it. Gay pride and its predecessors restored to homosexuals a control of the classifications into which they fall. There are always twists and turns in the tales of making up people, few more striking than the attempts to geneticise male homosexuality, to find the gay gene.”[21] 
Through the ten engines of discovery Hacking highlights that constructed identities work to subjugate people to language. The institutional formation of new kinds of people is a structural attack on freedom because the names generated by these creations are used to trap the mind in a singular train of thought.  Hacking’s philosophy proposes that rebellion against the material and abstract conditions of marginalized people is only possible if we actively destabilize our association with the labels we’ve grown comfortable with. In Historical Ontology Hacking describes the new parameters by which people measure obesity and the severity of autism as an example of building new kinds of humans saying, 
 “I think the counts were not mere reportings. They were part of an elaborate creating of new kinds of ways of people to be, and people innocently ‘chose’ to fall into these categories.”[22] Hacking’s emphasis on people’s choices to fall into new categories reinforces Hegel’s reference to the dangers that comfortability poses within echo-chambers. Hacking’s Historical Ontology harps back to Hegel’s historical philosophy and its effects on the human being. Hacking points to archaeology as the greatest contribution to philosophy because, “[archeology] may yet prove useful… to grasp the interrelations of power and knowledge that literally constitute us as human beings.”[23] Hacking’s insistence that history is intrinsic to our conceptualizations of power and knowledge proves that stagnant thought and attachment to labels withholds human’s from achieving their fullest potential. 
The inability to destabilize one’s own thoughts and belief systems, in addition to the labels societally assigned to them, ultimately stunts their full human potential. Hegel’s philosophical notions of the pervasiveness of stagnant thought in our progression as humans reveals that historical ignorance is the “slaughter-bench[24]” of society. Unwillingness to grow from the past mistakes kills the pursuit of freedom. Self-realization and perpetual freedom are impossible in the echo-chamber of stagnant thought. The human being is unable to progress and reach their full potential if they refuse to become comfortable with error. Rebellion against the material conditions of the physical world is impossible if the human mind is complacent in its artificial world and unwilling to attack its ignorance. A person’s unwavering adherence to labels and categorizations imprisons their consciousness, and by extension their ability to become free.






Bibliography: 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo. “Essays, First Series[1841].” Emerson - Essays - Self-reliance. American Transcendentalism Web. Accessed June 17, 2022. https://archive.vcu.edu/english/engweb/transcendentalism/authors/emerson/essays/selfreliance.html.
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, A. V. Miller, and J. N. Findlay. Phenomenology of Spirit. New York, New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
McCumber, John. Time and Philosophy: A History of Continental Thought. Durham, North Carolina : Acumen Publishing Limited, 2011. 
“Nominalism Definition & Meaning.” Merriam-Webster. Merriam-Webster. Accessed June 17, 2022. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/nominalism.
 Jaeggi, Rahel, Frederick Neuhouser, and Alan E. Smith. Alienation. New York, New York: Columbia Univ Press, 2016.
Hacking, Ian. “Ian Hacking · Making up People: Clinical Classifications · LRB 17 August 2006.” London Review of Books. London Review of Books, November 7, 2019. https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v28/n16/ian-hacking/making-up-people.
Hacking. Historical Ontology. Cambridge, Massachusetts : Harvard University Press, 2004: 48.
Robert Henri Cousineau, Humanism and Ethics: An Introduction to Heidegger's Letter on Humanism with a Critical Bibliography (Louvain: Nauwelaerts, 1972).: 210-211




________________
[1]Emerson, Ralph Waldo. “Essays, First Series[1841].” Emerson - Essays - Self-reliance. American Transcendentalism Web. Accessed June 17, 2022. https://archive.vcu.edu/english/engweb/transcendentalism/authors/emerson/essays/selfreliance.html. 
[2]         McCumber, John. Time and Philosophy: A History of Continental Thought. Durham, North Carolina : Acumen Publishing Limited, 2011: 47.
[3]Robert Henri Cousineau, Humanism and Ethics: An Introduction to Heidegger's Letter on Humanism with a Critical Bibliography (Louvain: Nauwelaerts, 1972).: 210-211
[4]Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich, A. V. Miller, and J. N. Findlay. Phenomenology of Spirit. New York, New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
[5]McCumber. Time and Philosophy: 32. 
[6]McCumber. Time and Philosophy: 33.
[7]McCumber. Time and Philosophy: 33.
[8]Hegel. Phenomenology: 80. 
[9]Hegel. Phenomenology: 90. 
[10]Jaeggi, Rahel, Frederick Neuhouser, and Alan E. Smith. Alienation. New York, New York: Columbia Univ Press, 2016: 20. 
[11]  Hegel. Phenomenology: 106. 
[12]McCumber Time and Philosophy: 37.
[13]McCumber Time and Philosophy: 42.
[14] “Nominalism Definition & Meaning.” Merriam-Webster. Merriam-Webster. Accessed June 17, 2022. https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/nominalism. 
[15]  Hacking, Ian. “Ian Hacking · Making up People: Clinical Classifications · LRB 17 August 2006.” London Review of Books. London Review of Books, November 7, 2019. https://www.lrb.co.uk/the-paper/v28/n16/ian-hacking/making-up-people. 
[16]  Hacking. Historical Ontology. Cambridge, Massachusetts : Harvard University Press, 2004: 48. 
[17] Hacking. Historical Ontology. 26. 
[18] Hacking. “Making up People: Clinical Classifications.” LRB. 
[19]  Hacking. “Making up People: Clinical Classifications.” LRB. 
[20]  Hacking. “Making up People: Clinical Classifications.” LRB. 
[21]  Hacking. “Making up People: Clinical Classifications.” LRB. 
[22]  Hacking. Historical Ontology. 50. 
[23]  Hacking. Historical Ontology. 50. 
[24] McCumber Time and Philosophy: 54.